14 September 1886
City of Rome.
Drove to the pier in a hansom, from Grand Central Hotel, at 1 o’clock, a
beautiful day, and after looking up our luggage went on board, and remained there,
looking over the ship, watching the loading of the vessel and visiting with friends. In the
evening Frederick went on deck, but I was tired and undressed and mounted my perch,
the upper berth, and though we had pulled close on the dock and were all night receiving
and loading freight just outside our port hole, I slept all night. As I said we went on board
early, eager to see our room. We found it a very comfortable little place, the space
opposite the berths and under the window a port hole, a round eye of glass, is occupied
by the couch. Over it and over each berth is a wall pocket and over the stationary wash
bowl, between it and the mirror a fresh linen pocket for brushes, fresh water bottle,
pneumatic bell call, and altogether a nice cosy little place. Dr Frauenstein called the
evening before sailing and we had a pleasant visit with him in the little boudoir
upholstered in old gold plush and Ebony. We talked of Miss Assing, & as the genial Dr
left he threw his arms around Frederick’s neck in a good old fashioned hug & kissed him,
kissed me, and ran off the steamer. A cordial wave of his hat from the dock and he was
gone.
But all on board was the bustle of departure. On both ends of the long steamer a
company of stevedores was hoisting and lowering into the hold great loads of pressed
cotton for English manufacture, and as night came on a queer looking box boat steamed
alongside, and before morning emptied its contents, great quarters of iced beef, into the
hold of our ship. I descended from my perch, dressed, & was on deck before time to start.
The Pilot, a pleasant calmed man of 45 yrs. passed a pleasant word with me before going
into the pilot house. Frederick came up, and soon the whistle soundeds. he gang plank
was pulled away and the mighty vessel moves quietly. These powerful tugs help to push
her enormous length around and as she gets rightly headed separate from her and go their
way. The pilot stays with us two or three hours, and leaves so quietly that we only know
it when he is gone. The Captain takes charge and we are fairly committed to the voyage.
The ocean is as smooth as any river, and about 4 hours out takes on the dark, exceedingly
dark blue hue, that I have never before seen. For an hour or so it has an anxious mottled
appearance that for some time I study in vain, but finally conclude to be due to millions
of little waves or ripples receiving the sunlight at different angles. Only 71 passengers
lose themselves in the spaces of this mighty ship that one week ago landed at New York
hundreds of home returning travellers, and we are told that in London are many waiting
passage, as the books of all the steamers westward bound are filled till into November.
One of the passengers is Rev. Henry Wayland son of old Dr. Wayland, and as Frederick
already knew him it was pleasant to meet. He looks and appears as if he might himself
command a ship. He is totally without appearance of affectation, and hearty and plain in
his manner of address, a six footer I am sure, and in a dark blue woolen suit including
cap. Frederick and he have already had some political conversation to which I was an
interested listener. To me there was the smell of mugwumpery on his mental garments,
but it might have been ship smell. Mr. Brelock too, who with his little daughter are
passengers, Frederick knew as a boy. He is a very pleasant man also. Just before coming
down to the writing table in the pretty dining saloon, furnished in dark green, we got into
conversation with a young Englishman who has been making an 18 days visit to the
States and Canada.
The sea has been very smooth so far with but little rocking of the boats Night
came on and we sought our berths. I slept well and was on deck at 5 1/2 o’clock by N.Y.
time. No one was there. The chairs had all been set in a cross passage and the decks
washed down which is done during the night. Soon a cheery Englishman who with his
son a stout young man, spoke with us in the evening came on deck. Nearly opposite us at
table sit Mr. and Mrs Chandler, she very pretty and gentle in appearance and he low in
voice but with an air of quiet authority that commends him as a man not to be trifled
with. The dining saloon is on the lowest floor I have seen, a large pleasant room in oak or
what looks like it, supported down its length by columns, the port holes or round
windows looking out on either side of the ship upon the broad ocean, an organ in the
farther End, to one side of which is the long writing table at which we, with others, write
and at which I am now sitting. This saloon is furnished in dark green plush, 8 long tables
Extending down the middle, with a row of short tables at either side. Part of one row of
short tables and part of the long table next to it, only, are occupied, as we have so few
passengers. There is variety in the dishes and they are well selected and nicely prepared.
The oat meal of breakfast is as good as anything we have, that is, it is to me a standby and
tastes good. Dr. Wayland sits way down at the end of the long table, and we are the last
of the inside away up the room. In the passage at the entrance of the dining room are the
stairs. Beyond in two narrow passages along the ship one Either side are state rooms, ours
being No 92, on right hand passage. Over the dining room is the drawing room, or saloon,
with piano at further end, the middle occupied by an open space looking down into the
dining room, surrounded by a neat railing, and containing hanging plants and two
canaries. Around the room are what would be settees, but that they are divided into
sections making of them individual chairs, the color of carpet and upholstery is greyish
and pleasing and restful to the Eye. Just outside this saloon are the decks where the
steerage passengers are when they wish to be outside. Above this saloon again is a lovely
little boudoir in old gold plush and Ebony, and the deck on this floor is the promenade
deck, where most of the cabin passengers spend much of their time.
Thursday, 16
The second day was slightly rougher, white caps appearing. We saw seven vessels
in all, three of which were steamers, one of which the Captain spoke (by signals) and one
from Amsterdam or Rotterdam I forget which, was crowded with passengers on deck as
we passed, curious like ourselves to see any steamer coming so near. We had made this
day, the 16th miles, and the Captain is directing his course rather to the northward.
During the day Dr Wayland came to Mr. Douglass, urging him to give an address
some evening of the voyage, as he had consulted with the Captain and several passengers
and there was a general desire to hear him. Mr. Brelock brought me a pretty Highland
story to read. He is of Scotch parentage. Mrs. Chandler, at table asked me about Eva
Pitts, whom she knew at Naples, and whom she greatly admired, and was much pleased
to find me her sister. We meet often on deck. She is going abroad for her health and will
visit Egypt and Palestine. She has completed a four years course in art. She was Isora
Schwartz. Her name I remembered at once as one Eva often mentioned, and her
marriage I partly remember, but cannot recall the particulars. To day they are testing
temperature of ocean by drawing up buckets ful and plunging a thermometer in.
Friday, 17
Rose early again and on deck, apparently the first one. Sea smooth again, the air a
little more like cold at first, but warm on deck. One of the officers Mr. Morrison came to
us before breakfast as we were sitting on deck and had quite a long pleasant conversation.
He has always been on the sea, first on sailing vessels, and for four years on the City of
Rome. Such a voyage as this is the perfection of luxurious travelling. The beautiful Ever
changing hues of the ocean, the grand sweep of the sea, the flitting vessels crossing our
path, and we wrapped in our easy chairs on deck, seem rather flying through the air, so
gentle is the motion of the boat. I have had some tendency to head ache and a little
qualmishness, but could walk or stand at any time, and have not yielded to it at all,
missing no meal, and am pronounced a good sailor. The wind has hitherto been against
us, but to day is in our starboard quarter, (right side quarter) and we have four sails set.
These and the immense straight iron masts, and three enormous black smoke pipes
sending their long black trail away behind them over the ocean, together with the
exceeding length of the vessel, nearly 100 ft longer than Washington Monument must
make an imposing sight. A card room with liquor counter, and a reading room, occupy
the upper part of the boat back of the stairs leading on either side to the deck. Last
evening Frederick and I looked into the card room where 4 men sat round a table
gaming—the first time I believe, that I ever saw it. One man I marked for a gentlemanly
villain, one looked like a lank American very grave and absorbed in the game. The other
two seemed younger men, and I wondered how it was faring with them. An attendant, as
we left, brought them from the counter, a waiter with 4 glasses of liquor, and we left them
with each a glass in hand.
The English passengers, the men, interest me greatly. Young, sturdy, in rough
clothes, generally a kind of checked suit, without superfluous sail, they have a
straightforward business like gait, that gets over the ground with least resistance. They
seem so totally free from fine dressiness, so sensible in their attire, that I cannot but like
them.
Saturday, 18 September
384 miles.
Up in the morning Early, sleeping like a top at night, and dropping asleep half
dozen times during day till my head is tired with much sleeping. The day windy and late
in afternoon huge billows begin to roll in, giving the steamer long plunging rolling
motion. In the morning petrels skim along and a whale showed himself which I did not
see. Towards night the fog came on, the decks were wet, and the whole feeling on my
part was a kind of disgust and I would have been glad to step ashore and never sail
another mile on sea.
Sitting on deck Mrs Chandler and I had a long visit. She has taken a 4 yrs course
in Art, had a large class of pupils in Portland, Oregon, has written some for papers and
published one book, “Althe,” not connected with art, I think, but a S.S. book. She
means to make this trip subservient to her art work. Then we walked the decks for a long
time, then Frederick and I watched the billows. After dinner we sat around the deck. I
undertook to read in the Library, & fell asleep. Retired in time, to be awakened by fog
horn, which for a time kept some of the passengers anxious. Fog betokens ice.
Sunday, 19
383 miles.
Morning damp but sat on deck till 10 ½ when English service was read by the
missionary from China, Mr. Groves his wife presiding at the organ. Quite a number of
the passengers met in the dining room but it was not very cheerful. The sining did not
reveal great talent among the audience. One burly man I took to be English, had been
parading the deck with two cigars from his ugly mouth. Someone asked him why two?
It’s Sunday, he replied, and said to someone that he was going to church and was going
to sing too. Surely enough when I went in there was Burly, and at the proper time he
stood up right in front of the clergyman, hands in breeches pocket and sang away for
ought I know like a nightingale. Some of the young English men went through the service
hardly looking on the book. I was not sorry when it was over. The missionary has a
nervous affection that makes it impossible for him to preach. The poor fireman, who
burst a blood vessel a few days ago died Saturday, and was buried at sea Sunday morning
at 4 o’clock. So we went on in the rolling waves leaving in mid ocean one who sailed out
with us buried before the passengers were out of their berths. I wondered if he had wife
and child waiting for him. At 3 o’clock, about equal to 12 at home, Mr. Wayland met all
who cared to join, in the Library, to go over the S.S. lesson of the International Series.
did not seem to amount to so very much but I was glad I attended. The latter part of the
day it rained, and though Frederick and I sat out a while covered up by wraps and
waterproof, we were compelled at last to go in, and after sitting a while in the pretty
saloon where some were reading, and a few about the piano, which does not seem
particularly melodious, joined in singing, went to bed. The oil on the machinery and the
water let into the rooms give two smells that I cannot endure. The first I try to keep away
from, the second I get rid of by having a pail of water brought to the room instead of
using the smelling water. It seems to be sour, and is said to grow worse instead of better.
It is condensed water, or formed by condensation and perhaps the tank is not clean.
I do not think we have on board a very brilliant company.
In the morning a school of porpoise gambolled about the ship but I missed them.
Frederick went after me to see them but when we got there they had disappeared.
Monday, 20
380 miles.
This morning I noticed upon rising that I had entirely different feelings and am
quite reconciled again to the voyage. Everyone seems to feel better. The sun has been
shining, and the clouds rolled along the horizon in great silvery masses, much like the
clouds we saw illumined by the sun on Mt. Washington. The morning I spent in the
library, and as I left just before lunch had a pleasant little chat with the China Missionary.
That burly, two cigar man, I am told is an Italian, and has a son as tall as himself, who
politely brought me a cup of beef tea, when it was brought on deck and passed with
crackers among the passengers there. This is done every morning at 11 o’clock, either
beef tea or chicken broth.
At the top of the upper stairs, branching each way to the deck, is hung a map of
the Atlantic, with the routes marked upon it, and each day at 12 o’clock our situation is
marked upon it, and the number of miles we have gone since 12 o’clock the preceeding
day, written down, so we may know just where we are, and how fast we are going. It has
been given out that Frederick will speak which makes him somewhat uncomfortable as
he fears imposing himself upon an audience. Nonsense! They need not come if they do
not want to.
Tuesday, 21 September
To day the passengers are eager to make good distance, and calculating the time
of reaching their journey’s end. The meeting was held in the saloon last night Capt.
Munro presiding. All seemed interested in Frederick’s little address which was over
before any one was ready for him to stop. He could have spoken an hour to their
satisfaction, but for himself, he was saved that effort. Mr. Wayland at once sprang to his
feet and asked attention for a few moments, and in his strong vigorous style gave
Frederick a few words of merited recognition. The contributions were made up to £5, and
it was decided to give it to the widow of the poor fireman. God save the Queen was
sung and the company dispersed. I should perhaps add that we have on board a real live
“lord,” Lord Porchester, son of the Earl of Carnarvon, a delicate but not sickly looking
slip of a young man, or boy, pink and white complexion, close curly hair, and face of no
great strength or promise. He with his tutor, have been travelling in America, & he is
taking a young seal home with him. Two young men are his constant companions one a
wealthy and pleasant fellow named King, the other I know not who or what. The tutor is
a rather severe red faced stocky, and silent man. These attended the address. Another
passenger who interests me is an old Captain, name unknown, originally from
Portsmouth, N.H. Been everywhere a ship can go, and though now about 70 yrs of age,
and apparently a little tremulous, en route to Calcutta. His personal affairs he keeps
locked tight, but is free to relate experiences here and there. Small, thin white hair,
bronze face, and very bright eyes, lays down even simple propositions with great gravity,
and with constant and emphatic use of the forefinger. Mr. Chandler does not like him, but
I do, and am ready to give him ear, and he evidently likes Frederick and me for audience.
According to his story he was in the Sipoy rebellion, in the Chinese war, and
the Caffre war, not as combatent perhaps, but present, and he denounced them all. He
must have been in East India, for he has the same quiet stealthy gliding way of appearing
and disappearing that we are told belongs to that people, and perhaps to no other. At any
rate he always reminds me of it. He sits at table with the Chinese missionary who is
english, and Mr. Blelock very amusingly relates to us his way of pinning down that
clergyman in American history, taking the wind completely out of his sails, till he seems
to dread the old Captain, as the fly dreads the spider. One morning he forgot his manners,
and rudely replied that he did not want American history rammed down his throat.
Whereupon the old Captain deftly but quietly hopped over to England, then to China and
made the poor clergyman’s discomfiture complete. The English man comes to table,
fidgets around, but sooner or later the little captain’s bright eye, and that solemn
forefinger of his begin their work, and alas, for Johnny Bull. There are five or six men
who seem to me scaly. They afiliate with each other and evenings gamble in the card
room, which contains the bar. As the days pass on we speak and are spoken to by most of
the passengers, who seem to like us, but the Chandlers and we, with Mr. Blelock and the
old Captain, who is an odd one, one by himself, perhaps I should say the Chandlers and
we seem to naturally come together. Mrs. Chandler is the “ornament” of the company I
think, and her husband is apparently proud of, and devoted to her. She told me in
confidence that he is a Meth. clergyman, but he came on board as Mr. Chandler, and no
one suspects his calling. He wished to travel in perfect freedom like any other man, and
is often amused to hear the surmises as to whether there are any clergymen aboard, and
who they are.
Wednesday, 23 September
Last evening the concert was held in the saloon, presided over by Lord
Porchester, not with that dignity a more earnest character would have shown. He was also
called upon for a song, and accompanying himself upon the piano, sang a silly little thing
called “That’s all,” and lisping out the words in quite a childish manner. Of course it was
cheered. The singing did not amount to anything but helped to vary the monotony of the
voyage. The Surgeon asked Frederick to move a vote of thanks to the Lord, which he
did. After the concert Lord Porchester was introduced to us, and in a remark or two
showed, I thought, a possibility of there being something to him after all. Mrs. Chandler
is growing quite animated over the prospect of reaching Queenstown, where they land to
make a short trip through Ireland before meeting Dr. Vincent in London. The young
Englishmen turn out rather common people, I think, and while there seem to be nice
people among the passengers, there are few I should care to “tie to.” In a day we all go
our several ways. Whither? More porpoises have been gambolling around, and the old
Captain says they jump out of the water to breathe. They look like good sized fish,
leaping forward out of the water like this
always leaping the old Capt. affirms,
toward the wind, so by them the sailors can tell the direction of the wind. They are a
warm blooded animal, and when they do not jump, come to the surface and stick their
noses out to breathe. To day I went down into the bowels of the deep, into the hold, no,
below the hold, into the very bottom of this huge ship, where are the furnaces and the
boilers and the machinery. I have been dreading going down, for one little lady who went
down said it was a dreadful place and that she ruined a dress by going, and Mr. Blelock,
who went down yesterday & who ruined a pair of pants, said nothing would induce him
to go down again, that when he got off in the end of the ship, way under water, he would
have given ten dollars to be up out of that frightful place. I was a little inclined to take
description for experience, but feeling I might always be sorry I had not seen for myself,
and Mr. Blelock offering to show me where they went down, and while looking one of
that inferno’s genii happening up and offering to conduct me, I thought it too good a
chance, and running back and taking off my dress skirt and pinning around me a carriage
lap cover in which we brought our deck blankets, put on my cloak which I left at the
entrance in Mr. Blelock’s hands, who waited for me, and followed my sooty guide. Down
we went three flights of iron steps, to where the ponderous machinery was clacking, to
where the dynamo was manufacturing the electric lighting of the ship, where hung the
electric dial in communication with the Capt. on the bridge, over the deck, away through
a narrow aperture to the stem of the ship, where the guide pointing to the copper slanting
side said “There is the skin of the ship!” There must have been the spot that gave Mr.
Blelock the terror, and had I allowed my imagination full scope I might have easily been
terrified. But I have kept a watchful restraint over it all the voyage and therefore escaped
a natural terror. Then back past the mighty working levers to the huge furnaces 63 in
number in nine rows of 7 each, with the sooty fireman stripped to the waist, opening and
closing those firery maws. Each furnace is surmounted by a huge boiler, like the boiler of
a locomotive, and down the middle of this row there was a little path between leading to
the tier beyond. Through it we went the boilers so near each other it seemed as if the hair
would be burned from our heads, but we came out in safety, and turning with a cheerful
good bye to these toiling attendants who could have stopped us in mid-ocean had they
chosen, I followed my guide into the upper air, rewarded him with a bit of silvers
donned my coat, and the thing was done.
No wonder the poor fireman died, how they could ever get him up those circular
stairs without killing him I do not see, and the stifling air of those furnaces would have
ended him had he staid below.
Thursday, 24 September
I read rather more industriously than I cared to to get through with Richard Grant
White’s book on England, which Mr Wayland handed me with the remark that he
preferred it to English Traits. I do not, but by all means prefer the Traits,
though I am glad to know all Mr. White tells us. About 2 or three o’clock we sighted land
at first like a cloud resting on the horizon, which at sea seems much nearer than one
would suppose. This filmy outline gradually assumed tangibility and towards night we
came directly across the rocky, dreary, barren coast of Kerrys. At last upon a stretch of
mountain side we descried numerous little huts clinging for dear life apparently, while the
barren mountain side itself was seamed with dark lines which marked the stone walls by
which it was divided. “Poor, barefooted Ireland” exclaimed Frederick gazing sadly upon
those shores he first saw forty one years ago. "Rich in wit, but poor in wisdom!” The
wind was fresh but these shores were so facinating that I stayed out in the cold watching
them, as long as we could see. About o’clock we neared Queenstown, and Mrs.
Chandler’s eyes brightened as she looked forward to putting her foot again on solid land,
and bidding good bye to sea sickness. She even grew merry in anticipation and gladly
came forth from her state room in coat and a very dressy little befeathered hat, and with a
few others awaited the transferring to a steaming boat that came alongside. We said good
bye and from the upper deck watched the transfer. Our great steamer seemed solid and
immovable, while the little tug or whatever it was bobbed up and down, now mounting
up as if it would come to the upper deck & then sinking down again into the darkness.
After the luggage was safely deposited, the passengers filed over, and I could not help
being amused to see Mrs. Chandler meekly filing over with the rest, like a poor little
martyr, her triumphant air all vanished. The plank was withdrawn, the bobbing lights
moved off, they were introduced to the old world through Queenstown and we steamed
on our way toward Liverpool. There has been one little baby, the son of a young Dr.
Brown from IIls. going to study in London,” and a youngster of 31 yrs I believe, who
with his mother, English, are going back to Yorkshire to see “Grandma.” He is a sturdy
well behaved little fellow, and sits opposite us at table. Mr. Blelock says the old Capt.
steams up in the afternoon & by 3 o’clock feels quite happy. How I do hate the stuffy
state rooms at night. We have had to have the port hole closed for two or three nights
past, as the sea has been high, and the water is dashed against the port hole with
considerable violence. The long plunging motion of the vessel, dipping her bows beneath
the waves, then rising, rising, till she turns to plunge again, is to me the most unpleasant.
The top of the head seems to fly off.
I forgot to mention Fastnet light, signalled before dark a tower that reminded me
of Sankaty Head tower in Nantucket but perched on a single bold rock rising up from
the sea as if for the express purpose of upholding that light to mariners.
Thursday, 24 September
Early this morning the noble coast of Wales came in sight. Bold in outline it is at
the same time cheerful, and not like the sad dreary Kerry coast, but to me the Kerry rocks
were quite as interesting. Ireland is no longer in sight. Wales absorbs the attention. But
the clouds veil Snowdon, and in vain we stretch our gaze for a sight of this highest land
in Great Britain. We saw cottages here also but not such dreary little huts as the Irish.
They were white and the hill sides looked as if they might have good grass, while the
Irish mountain sides seemed barely covered with a thin mossy looking skin of dull green.
We steamed past Anglesee
wishing we might but get sight of the tubular bridge, of
course impossible, and were at last compelled to take another lunch on board. Then a low
lying shore became visible, and this was old England. Then we began to have a stretch of
land upon both sides of us, and finally as we came in site of Liverpool the tide being out
the City of Rome dropped anchor two clumsy dirty sort of ferry boats with no cabin
steamed up alongside, one at the bow for cabin passengers, one at the stem for steerage
passengers, and thus we sailed up the Mersey to Liverpool, the great seaport which now
has 1/3 the foreign trade of Great Britain. On our way we met the Manx Steamer for the
Isle of Man, with the arms of that Island upon its side
something
after this fashion. Soon the Snaefell, from Douglass, Isle of Man, passed us carrying a
crowded deck into Liverpool. These steamers are said to make 21 miles an hour. Soon we
passed Birkenhead on our right, occupying what seemed a natural hill side, an outskirt
apparently of Liverpool between which and the city lie a very few of the many wonderful
docks that are the pride and glory of Liverpool.
With my first step on the landing stage, I said to myself, “England,” and passed
on through a file of porters or some sort of pleasant looking official in uniform holding in
their hands a what seemed a red morrocco flat book with “Midland” in large gilt letters
on the outside where all could see. I suppose the other Roads were also represented.
While waiting for Frederick to see to the luggage one of our passengers had his bag and
box poked over right before my eyes which I turned away while a group of men
watched the proceedings with all that curiosity which is said to belong especially to
woman. When our traps were collected, the trunk only was merely opened by raising
the lid, locking again, while upon all the official clapped his ticket, and we departed with
them. Before this however, Frederick had been accosted by a young man from Ohio,
fresh and ruddy as an Englishman. Yankee Doodle is every where. We had upon the tug
bade adieu to our friend the old Captain, whose last story was that he once started out
from Liverpool in company with five other ships, that down and out aways a storm arose,
and his was the only ship that rode through the gale and crossed the Atlantic. One went
ashore on the Welsh coast, one put in to Milford Haven, I believe, and three returned
disabled to Liverpool. May we sometime meet again. We took a cab, on to the top of
which they bounced our heavy trunk, it seemed as if it must come through on to my head,
it was before Frederick got in, and away we went to a private hotel reccomended by a
steward of the City of Rome. A dubious looking place when we got to it. Two men
panted upstairs with the trunk, but before I got it more than unlocked, in came Frederick
who meantime had found another place, and up came two more men to pant down stairs
again and around the corner to a plain but neat house on Lord Nelson St. where we have
taken up our aboad for the time we stay in Liverpool. The girl who waits upon us, Nelly,
is a chubby pretty, honest, little girl of 16 or 18 yrs. I should think and very capable. Our
dinner, we eat alone, seemed quite as if taken from a story. We had the traditional chops,
and they were sweet and good.
In the evening we went out for a walk. We are only two blocks from St. George’s
Hall one of or the principle building in the city, containing an organ said to be the largest
in England.° In St. George’s Hall are held the Sessions, or Criminal Court.” Concerts
are also held in the Hall.“ It is approached through a sort of square surrounded by posts
and an iron chain low enough to step over, two great portals of stone, i e,
a stone block on each side, surmounted by a crouching lion, making 4 lions. Within the
railing & on the square, on pedastals, are Prince Albert at one end and the Queen at the
other,” on horseback while in middle between the two is a large statue upon a pedastal of
Lord Beaconsfield. It was only the common and the lower classes on the street where
we walked in the evening, but little begrimed children in tatters, and great bare-legged,
bare-headed girls, were hurried along the crowd. The faces of many are tolerably cheerful
but not happy in expression. Life is certainly a struggle here.
Friday, 25 September
Walked out down by Clayton Sq, in Church St. where we lunched, in the Market,
in Bold St., then up by the Adelphi, and toward home, meeting again the Ohio man of
the first hour here with two companions. Rode on train to Pier & back. In P.M. walked
out again up London Road meeting the surging crowd seeing the poor children
begrimed & in tatters, little barefooted, ragged boys running after the train cars, turning
cart wheels in the hope of having a penny thrown them. Met a strange foreigner, hatless
& with some sort of covering thrown around his lithe body, hurrying as if pursued. In
evening again walked down Lime St, seeing the same or a similar crowd back across
the sq in front of St. George’s Hall & to our room. Our meals are served to only
ourselves, at any hour we designate. Nellie who waits upon us is a bright pretty girl from
Yorkshire.
O, the misery that cruely abides in this city. What are these poor barefooted
tattered children to do when winter comes? Our landlady avers that many of them are in
the street with very likely drunken mothers at home that this town is second only to
Glasgow in the amount of drunkenness among women.
Saturday, 26 September 1886
Went immediately after breakfast to the exposition riding on top of train to get
the view. Spent about 6 hours on our feet looking, and then had not seen every thing. The
ship models are beautiful and in great no. Naval architecture was fully represented, &
from every country but U.S. A locomotive like Geo Stephenson’s, Royal carriages, &
royal harness, including 2 sets of Geo olk & heavy with gold plate, the others red
& gold plated, statuary from Florence, Coral from Naples, glass from Venice Bohemian
glass, Furs from Norway, Lace from Belgium, and gum from the United States.
We met in the American department Mrs. Colby a very pleasant lady having
charge of a historical chart in the exhibit, published, I believe by Adams.
There was also beautiful caned furniture from Italy, some ancient and some made
like old. Just before entering we met a pretty girl from Vienna, Aus. a Hungarian who
had charge of a glass stand, of Bohemian glass. She had been in the U.S. and liked
America much. As it was raining when we came out, took a hansom. After dinner walked
out a little again to a store in London Road, bought some paper & envelopes & photo of a
Rev. Brown whom Frederick saw here before but who died about 2 or 3 months ago.
Sunday, 27 September 1886
Had intended to hear the Rev. Stowell Brown, a Baptist clergyman who
introduced Frederick to an audience when here years ago. But we learned in the little
store last evening that the good man had died. Frederick purchased his photograph, and
this morning instead of going to church we walked for an hour & a half going down Lime
St. & around by Abercromby Sq. into the London Road home. People will look at
Frederick wherever we go, but they wear no unpleasant expression. Many have a decided
appearance of interest. In the evening we walked up to Pemberton Place and entered a
Baptist church. The minister preached from the text in Genesis, Come in thou blessed
of the Lord. Why stand ye without? A plain, practical, earnest sermon. His pulpit, some
like those in Cath. churches stood up by itself around the edge of a sq platform
surrounding it a row of little boys led by a man in singing each boy holding a book by
himself & singing away like little angels, I hope. After the sermon the minister descended
unseen, and in the rear baptized two persons.
Monday, 28 September 1886
Wrote home in morning. In P.M. we visited the Walker Art Gallery, or the
permanent exhibition, not time for the Autumn exhibition in same building. Many verry
interesting pictures, including that of the Saxon noble freeing his Saxon slave. The model
of Windsor castle, & of castle & abbey ruins especially fine. Were acosted while there
by a Miss Oakey of 19th St. Washington.
Tuesday, 29 September 1886
Mr. Rawlins called. Then on Lime St took a hansom to Great Eastern pier where
we went aboard a clumsy crowded boat that took us down past some of the wonderful
docks, by some ship yards past some war vessels to the Great Easter, used now as a
show for shows & advertisements. An immense vessel. Lunched on board, then
descended with a crowd to the great compartment in which was conveyed the cable,
which is now used as a theater & saw the plays that interested the audience. On the boat
going out to the Great Eastern, Frederick saw some girls take out their whisky bottle, &
we saw a man & wife sit down with lunch & bottle.
Wednesday, September 30 1886
From Lime St. Station took my first R.R. ride in Old England, through lovely,
quiet landscapes, beautiful fields enclosed by trim hedge rows, to old Chester. At depot
met a Miss Mason, American, been in Chester 2 weeks, abroad 5 yrs, was homesick,
awaiting the cars to London & going home at once. Took a car top ride through town, to
end of route & back to East Gate. Visited the old Cathedral, my first. The organ was
pealing through the vaulted isles as we entered & the voice of the clergyman reading the
service in the distant choir sounded weird enough. The choristers too, filing out beyond
the columns & the great marble tomb, and at last disappearing in the distance, was a
picture not to be forgotten. The whole experience was one to be remembered. It was only
marred by my feeling I had not sufficient time for it. Saw an American from Chicago
there, in a hurry. Spent the day in walking around the walls, mounting the towers visiting
the Rows,2 where poor Frederick became too tired to continue, returned to the depot & I
continued through some of the old streets, took a car & joined him. Eaton Hall unhappily
for us closed.
Thursday, 31 September 1886
Visited Autumn exhibition of paintings, where were many beautiful sketches of
Welsh scenery, as well as of English views. Lunched in gallery & from there went to
Library & Museum. Saw 2 or 3 hundred working men seated at their books, a most
interesting sight, except the fear that their presence was due to their being without work.
Spent our time in museum, looking at the treasures gathered & stored in cases, glass
covered for inspection. Miniatures & other relics of the Bonaparte family, 100
Cromwell’s cup, Burns candlestick, Henry 6th gloves & boots silver spoon
presented by him, & the 1st known of bearing maker’s name, watch given by Louis
16th to Maria Antoinette.
Friday, 1 October
Left Liverpool at 11:20 a.m. in the rain, for St. Neots, intending to spend the night
at Peterboro and see the cathedral. But the tickets would not admit of stopping & we
came on unannounced to Mrs. Crofts, in St. Neots, a quaint little English town hidden
away from the R.R. station, built of a yellowish stone, opening immediately onto the
narrow sts that seems more like lanes than a sts, of 4000 inhabitants and no newspaper. It
seems the queerest little place possible. The houses, I should call them cottages, are low,
and as I said open directly upon a cobble stone side walk, on the roadway itself. Coming
from Liverpool we passed through beautiful landscapes, hedgerows, fields cultivated like
gardens, and what appeared almost perfect country roads, clean as if swept by a broom,
and not a single person riding upon them. We came between some barren mountain
tops, I think in southern Yorkshire, & first we knew ran through a tunnel coming out
upon another landscape and running quite away from the rain. We passed in the
vicinity of the underground palace of the late Duke of Portland.
We passed through two long tunnels, one of which was a 5 minutes tunnel. A nice
little English woman & two children got out at for their home, a great plum
region. She had been very kind in pointing out and describing, and we were sorry for
her to go. Afterwards a ruddy young Englishman & a rather sickly looking man got in,
the latter from Natal, but English born. At the Cross St. Neots, Mrs. Crofts met us
with open arms. We had tea, went to bed in a cosy chamber and I spent my first night in a
real English home, feeling how surely walls can open from a very common outside to the
most cheerful and elegant hearthstones, shut away entirely from the world.
Saturday, 2 October
In the morning a walk with Mrs. Crofts & Frederick (the trio) first to the beautiful
old church, English of course & tending to high ritualism, then the cemetery, & through
lovely lanes back to dinner. Breakfast 8. dinner 1. tea 4. supper 8. everlasting eating, but
not much at a time, which is after all perhaps, the better way. After dinner, a donkeyish
with Frederick driving, took us to Buckden,
looking diminutive horse & I think a fly,
an old coaching town, to the Towers, the palace in which Catherine of Arragon spent
some time before going to Kimbolton where she died. Adjoining was the old parish
church, in the church yard of which were the graves of two of her nephews, who being at
Cambridge & the sweating sickness breaking out, she brought them to Buckden, where
the unfortunate youths sickened & died. We took tea at the the old coaching inn of the
town, which being one of the halting places on the old road from London to York had
seen many a mery bout of bluff Old Harry’s merry men. The road thence was
beautiful as no other than English roads I believe can be, but, beautiful as it is, this part of
the country depresses me by its flatness. I rather some elevation if bleak. We ambled
home, much amused by our little beastie, who in the midst of a very respectable trot
would suddenly almost stop as if overcome by sudden weakness, then after a proper
interval jog on again.
Sunday, 3 October
To church in morning. The choir boys marched in in white robes, the lessons were
read & I like an American barbarian could not find a single place in the ritual. Sermon by
a stranger—very tame. P.M. Frederick went with Miss Crofts to Wesleyan meeting. In
evening the Meth, or Wesleyan, pastor & a teacher took supper with us. I liked
especially the pastor.
Monday, 4 October
A day to be remembered. A pilgrimage to Cambridge. With a guide we visited
Keys, Trinity, Kings, St. Johns, the Round Church, the gardens, crossed the bridge of
Sighs (after the one at Venice), Trinity Chapel, and finished the day by attending service
at Kings Chapel. The hour, 5 P.M. the slim wax tapers, the fading day light coming
through the grand painted windows, the noble organ, the magnificent anthem, the solemn
echoing of the vaulted roof, the silent listeners, the beautiful singing, all made it an hour
to be ever remembered.
We, the trio, went back to the hotel for our tea & thereby
nearly lost our train, the waiters assuring us the omnibus would be around in time, &
even when nearly time for train to start calmly asserting there was time enough. We
finally left them entirely, secured a carriage & reached our train, & left all the glories of
Cambridge behind us, to be treasured in memory forever.